Skin Diseases

Allergies, irritants, genetic makeup, certain diseases, and immune system problems can cause skin conditions.

Acne
What is acne? It is caused when blocked skin follicles from a plug caused by oil from glands, bacteria, and dead cells clump together and swell.

Alopecia Areata
What is alopecia areata? It is a condition that attacks your hair follicles (they make hair). In most cases, hair falls out in small, round patches.

Atopic Dermatitis
What is atopic dermatitis? It is a skin disease causing much itchiness. Scratching leads to redness, swelling, cracking, weeping clear fluid, crusting, and scaling.

Epidermolysis Bullosa
What is epidermolysis bullosa? It is a group of diseases causing painful blisters to form on the skin. These blisters can cause problems if they become infected.

Hidradenitis Suppurativa (HS)
Hidradenitis suppurativa (also known as acne inversa) is a chronic, noncontagious, inflammatory condition characterized by pimple-like bumps or boils and tunnels or tracts on and under the skin.

Ichthyosis
What is ichthyosis? It is a disorder that causes dry, thickened skin that may look similar to fish scales.

Pachyonychia Congenita
What is pachyonychia congenita? It is a rare disorder causing thick nails and painful calluses on the bottoms of the feet and other symptoms.

Pemphigus
What is pemphigus? It is a disease where the immune system attacks healthy cells in the top layer of skin, resulting in blisters.

Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes red, scaly skin that may feel painful, swollen, or hot. Learn more about the types and what causes psoriasis.

Raynaud’s Phenomenon
What is Raynaud’s phenomenon? It is a disease that affects blood vessels. It causes your body to not send enough blood to the hands and feet for a period of time.

Rosacea
What is rosacea? It is a long-term disease that causes reddened skin and pimples, usually on the face. It can also make the skin thicker and cause eye problems.

Scleroderma
Scleroderma causes patches of tight, hard skin, but can also harm your blood vessels and organs. Learn the causes and treatments of this skin disease.

Vitiligo
Vitiligo is a disorder that causes patches of skin to become white. It happens because cells that make color in your skin are destroyed.